TAP2WAV : CONVERT .TAP FILES TO .WAV FILES

This tool produces WAV files from the Oric TAP images you use with emulators.

Please read this small documentation entirely if you want to successfully
transfer WAV files to your real Oric...

Here is an example of using Tap2wav :

assuming that you have both tap2wav.exe and krillys.tap in the same directory,
type the following command at a MS-DOS prompt, or from the Execute box of
Windows' Start menu :

tap2wav -11 krillys.tap krillys.wav

This will create krillys.wav in your directory, which you may then play with
your favorite WAV player (or just double-click from Windows) in order to
send it to your real Oric (more on this later). The '-11' option in this
example asks tap2wav to produce a 11 kHz WAV file. Alternatively, you may
use a -8 option instead in order to produce a 8 kHz WAV file (the resulting
file will be smaller) or even not give any option and get a 4800 Hz WAV file
(even smaller).

WHY SHOULD YOU USE THOSE FREQUENCY OPTIONS ?

You might say smaller files are better and you are right, but you will have
to use these options if your Windows PC is not able to reliably play 4800 Hz
wave files ! If you get an ERRORS FOUND on the Oric when playing a 4800 Hz
file, then use either 8000 Hz (option -8) or 11025 Hz (option -11). Every
PC should be able to play those frequencies correctly...

The frequency you request is not the frequency that is used to encode Oric
tape format, this one has to be standard otherwise a CLOAD on your Oric
wouldn't read it. Of course, it is not possible to get a precise 2400 baud
rate when using 8 or 11 kHz, but don't worry, the approximative rates used
at these sampling frequencies will be perfectly accepted by the Oric (maybe
even better than the original rate, because of a bigger separation of the
'0' and '1' lengths).

If adding this frequency option might sound like a hassle for you, tell it to
Microsoft and its soundcard-drivers writers who don't bother producing correct
waveplayers. It would be easier for me too if every PC were able to play 4800
Hz files correctly : you will soon have 8 kHz or 11 kHz files on your hard
disk, and this will soon oblige me to update Euphoric so that it reads any
WAV file, whatever the sampling frequency is (as of version 0.99n, Euphoric
only reads 4800 Hz files).

SO, HOW DO I TRANSFER A PROGRAM TO MY TRUSTY ORIC ?

Produce the WAV file as explained above (start with using the -11 option at
first, you will check if your PC is able to play 4800 Hz files later...).

Connect your Oric TAPE INPUT to the LINE OUT output of your PC soundcard.
ALL THIS IS AT YOUR OWN RISKS ONLY, I CAN'T BE MADE RESPONSIBLE OF ANY DAMAGE
YOU MAKE TO YOUR ORIC, YOUR PC, YOUR HOME OR ANY LIFE BEING IN THE NEARBY !!!
I'm no electronic expert, but I recommend you don't connect to the SPEAKER OUT
output of your PC soundcard... there has been at least one people who burnt
the LM386 chip of his Oric. I can say that I have used this way to transfer
files for a long time, without any damage for my Oric or PC. If this sounds
frightening, you might try to connect a tape recorder to your soundcard
instead, and record the program on tape before loading it on the Oric.

Anyway, when the cable is connected, the only thing you have to do is to type
CLOAD""
on your Oric, and then start playing the WAV file on the PC (well, you would
have guessed...)


PROGRAM LIMITATIONS

This Tap2wav program is able to encode most TAP files, including multipart
programs. But it might fail to produce the correct signal when converting some
protected programs (those that use invalid headers).


Happy transfers,

Fabrice
